## Problems with gestors

As in any profession, among gestors, you can find both responsible and qualified specialists as well as less
conscientious ones. I would not wish anyone to encounter a problematic gestor because, most likely, you'll have to
resolve tax issues on your own.

While it is impossible to completely avoid risks, you can minimize them by:

1. Collaborating only with gestors who meet [key reliability criteria](#criteria-for-a-reliable-gestor).
2. Understanding the processes yourself at least at a basic level and periodically checking what and how your gestor
   fills out. For this, read this document in more detail.

Below are examples of real situations encountered by clients who found themselves in unpleasant circumstances. All names
and data have been anonymized.

It is important to remember critical thinking: in each situation, the fault may lie with either the gestor or the
client. It is difficult to definitively assess who is right from the outside. But after studying these cases, it will be
easier for you to avoid similar problems.

### Situation 1: Errors in opening or closing autónomo

A frequently discussed problem in the [chat](https://bit.ly/it-autonomos-es){:target="_blank"} is the incorrect opening
or closing of an autónomo. In such cases, the client may lose a discount on social payments or face fines. Often,
gestor errors result in extra money being withdrawn from the account, for example, if the autónomo was closed late.

Most of these situations are not critical, with damages amounting to a few hundred euros. If the gestor is responsible,
they will cover the damage; otherwise, you will have to cover it yourself.

### Situation 2: Complete absence of any accounting work

A client managing several companies had long been doing accounting through one gestoría. This gestoría constantly
changed staff, responses were often delayed, and contact with the client was conducted not by an accountant, but by a
translator fluent in Russian and Spanish.

At some point, the client got fed up and decided to switch to a new gestor. It turned out that for the current year, no
accounting work had been done at all, despite the year already nearing its end.

Moreover, the old gestoría took a long time to provide the new gestor with the necessary documents to complete the
transition. After some time, the old gestoría claimed that the problem was that the client was sending invoices in the
wrong format. They claimed to have warned the client, but since the errors were repeated, they simply stopped addressing
the issue.

How it all ended is unknown.

### Situation 3: Serious errors in declarations

The autónomo had a large income, but the gestor indicated an income of only X 000 euros (amounts are intentionally
omitted here) several times in the declarations. After an audit, the tax office found discrepancies and stated that the
actual income for the year was X00 000 euros. As a result, the tax office ordered the autónomo to pay the missing tax,
as well as a fine, the amount of which depended on the underpaid tax. If the autónomo had immediately agreed to pay the
tax and fine, the fine would have amounted to 25,000 euros.

For some unknown reason, the client was reviewing tax office notifications and communicating with them directly instead
of through the gestor. The gestor refused to deal with it, stating that he did not have time to read the notifications.

The client also missed the first two notifications from the tax office, paying attention only to the third one, which
turned out to be critical. When he turned to the gestor for help, the gestor replied that he could no longer help. The
client decided to respond to the tax office on his own.

Later it turned out that the gestor had repeatedly made mistakes, entering incorrect amounts on the invoices. When the
new gestor double-checked the data, it turned out that the client's actual income was about half of what the tax office
had stated when issuing the fine. If the client had contacted a competent gestor in time, the size of the fine could
have been reduced.

The new gestor consulted a specialized tax lawyer. However, the lawyer explained that there was little chance of
changing the situation since the client had already started negotiations with the tax office on his own and had provided
incorrect answers. Even if corrected data were submitted, it was unclear whether the tax office would reconsider them.

If a lawsuit were filed, it would be aimed not at establishing the correctness of the original data, but at disputing
the tax office's decision, which was based on the answers provided by the client.

How it all ended is unknown.
